ocial and Governmental (ESG) features are important for the fund management industry.  ESG are becoming important factors for investors, particularly those that we call 'millennials'.  The financial services industries is working to develop appropriate products.  Investors do not have to choose between doing good and making a return on investment.

ESG themes can work through avoidance, positive selection and efforts to engage.   Investors can avoid industries like tobacco, alcohol and gambling.  They can avoid fossil fuel, firearm manufacturing and firms that use child labour.  There have been fears that there could be some cost to to pay for this ethical choice.  Investment returns could be lower.  It is now evident that avoiding sin might be profitable.   The BP DeepWater oil spill and the the Volkswagen emissions scandal show that ESG factors might identify sources of reputational risk.  This risk becomes more important as new technology make global communication powerful.  

Because of this the ESG industry is now more likely to select firms for positive attributes.  The growing importance of millennials furthers this process.  Surveys suggest that young people are more conscience of these ethical issues when making a decision to buy goods, assets or when they chose an employer.  

There is an attempt to develop ESG factors as part of the growth of  factor investment.  The process has been challenging as there are many hurdles to be overcome. The first of these is the more qualitative nature of ESG factors. It is hard to measure environmental, social and governmental factors. There is a race to develop acceptable benchmarks as ways of constructing portfolios and assessing performance. 

It is also possible to engage with companies to change their behaviour.  Corporate ownership is increasing concentrated in the hands of passive asset managers. These fund face increasing public pressure to use their controlling interest in a positive rather than way. 

====================
First attempt

There are three broad ways that ESG themes can be persued by investors: avoidance, positive selection and efforts to engage. The first of these is the traditiona approach that would avoid sindustries like tobacco, alchool and gambling.  This might be extended to fossile fuels, manufacturers of firearms and other weapons or companies that made use of child labour.  It was originally anticipated that there would be some cost to be paid for this ethical choice.  Investment returns were expected to be lower.  However, it is increasinly evident that avoiding sin micgh actually b eprofitable.  A series of events that include the BP DeepWater oil spill and the the Volkswaggen emissions scandel have helped to nurture the idea that ESG factors might also represent risks that could be avoided.  The increased attention that has been paid to reputational risk and reputational damage and the improvements in communiccation with the likes of Twitter add to the sense that some firms are more likely to engage in activities that expose them to unconventional shocks to their reputation, business model, revenues and profits. 

As such, the ESG industry has become more focusd on a more positive process to try to select those companies that are environmentally responsible, socially aware and wtih good governance that will not only reduce the risk of but will gain a positive reputation that will attract customers and employees, imporving revenues and the quality of the workforce. The growing importance of millennials as consumers and (more gradually) as asset owners facilitates this process.  Surveys suggest that these young people are more consciece of these ethical issues when making a decision to purchase or chosen an employer.  Elements of this are aleady apparent with the United Nations Sustainable Development goals, actions of major asset owners like the Norwegian petroleum fund and questons from students about the composition of university endowmments. 

An extension of the growth of trditional factor investment has been the attempt to develop ESG factors and to tie them to Exchange Traded Funds (ETF).  This process has been challenging as there are a number of hurdles to be overcome. The first of these is the more qualitative nature of ESG factors. While momentum and price-to-book ratios are easily tied down, it is less straight-forward to measure environmental, social and governmental factors. There is a race at present to develop benchmarks that will be accepted as ways of constructing portfolios and methods of assessing performance. This competition is likely to produce some winners and some standardisation over the next 12 months. 

The third way that ESG can be persued is through active engagement in companies to change their behaviour. This could be done through an extension of the approach that some hedge funds take to raise a stake and use that to influence company policy. However, that comes against a backdrop ofan industry that finds that corporate ownership is increasing concentrated in the hands of indifferent passive asset managers. These ETF holders face their own public pressures with BlackRock's Larry Fink accused of hypocracy for advicating social change while his fund holds such large stakes in companies that have been criticised.  This criticism may cause ETF managers to take a more active role in the firms that make up their target indices. 
